Well, we're talking to John Maggs.
Yes.
And what title do you retain here, sir?
I retain title now as chairman of a company.
Uh-huh.
And our son Edward is now managing director, thank goodness, because it's hard, and you have to be young.
Now I've turned 70.
I can't rush as fast as I do.
That's the trouble.
how the book trade, this extraordinary explosion that started with Bernard Quaridge when he came from Germany in the middle of our century.
We put great-grandfather Maggs down as 1853, but Bernard Quaridge was already in business before that.
But they were much bigger, much sooner than we were.
And of course that has hurt me because there's no mention of Maggs in there at all that Clements
I don't think Clements was buying.
That's kind of unusual because he really didn't like exploration and Americana.
No, but he was Henry Stevens.
That was the point.
Henry Stevens would have been perfect for him.
In the days when he was the greatest.
But isn't it intriguing that book that was published in California about the immigrant booksellers in California.
That is amazing.
It's just wonderful.
Now which book are we talking about?
Not the...
Is this a recent book?
Yes.
Rosenthal, isn't it?
The Rosenthal Family.
Okay, I'll check it out.
I'm not so sure I know.
Oh, oh.
You're talking, of course, about the Barney Rosenthal.
Exactly.
That's right.
I'm hoping you have a chapter on that in this new book.
I've already interviewed Barney.
Outside that door, up on the top, there's a switch which turns off that noise.
You'll see, jump just out of the door, and immediately left and up above, you'll see there's a little switch.
You see that?
Switch that up, and then that stops that sound.
Yes, that was called The Gentle Invaders, I think you're talking about.
Isn't that the lecture that Barney gave?
Exactly, and the immigrants.
The immigrants.
He gave this lecture at Columbia University, I believe.
Yeah.
Oh, people like Krauss.
People like Krauss and...
Goldschmidt, not the one from here, but the one over there, Lucian, I guess.
I'm interviewing his widow next week, as a matter of fact, in New York.
You might have some suggestions of people I should talk to, because I said there were quite a few who came here, too, as well.
But they're dying.
They are dying, but they have survivors.
Yes.
I don't know.
There's only one that's alive, so far as I can determine, which is Albert Febig in New York.
Just a name to me.
Yeah, that's it.
But you know, we've lost Bill Fletcher in the last weeks.
I didn't know that.
He was one of the greatest of the British booksellers.
Now, you brought this up as being very interesting.
Why did you bring that up?
As to how this book trade developed in London, middle of last century, it is intriguing.
It intrigues you about it.
As to how Mack's Anquiry got started.
Don't you find that?
Absolutely.
It's a major concern, the consideration of this new book.
How the book trade influences where the books go and who gets them.
And then, Lathrop Harper is another part that no one remembers.
This is my life, a lot of it.
I was born in 26.
I started here in 1947.
when this was still going on.
So, you weren't working here during the war years, of course, but you... No, my father was, though.
What was it like during the war years?
My father was busy doing business with G.I.'s.
And, uh, every G.I.
would come in here, and they wanted to buy a map.
Of the groups in Britain.
And so he would sell these G.I.'
's like the speed maps.
for next to nothing.
And this is right here at Barclay Square?
Yes.
And then how... They were constantly having to save the place from being destroyed.
You know, the firebombs, which were coming down thick and fast.
And you've only got minutes.
If you could get up to the roof and pick that... You've seen those in centuries, haven't you?
There were little tubes of magnesium.
And if you could pick that thing up, as it was just starting, and throw it into the street, you might save your building.
Wow.
And then, of course, the canny Germans then finally got onto that, and they started putting high explosives in them, as well as incendiary.
You could be blown to bits.
And so what they did was to divide the whole place up into areas with a team, and perhaps to be somebody
all night on TV, awake, to see what they could do to save the place.
And they had to know the insides of all the adjacent buildings so that they could run in.
And it's nice to be able to see what's happening outside.
Do you have a telly there?
Yes.
That's my post-circuit service.
I don't feel lonely.
And, you know, the intriguing story about that, which I've never forgotten, is that next door to us was Helena Rubenstein.
Whoa!
Yes, I saw.
Thank you.
There you go.
Good.
There's no lock, of course, ever.
No.
There's some ancient nautical instruments, I saw.
Yes, that was a scientific sale.
So I had a commission to go to buy a microscope for somebody in the States.
And while I was there, I thought, well,
Let's have a go at this.
There's a lovely sextant there, which was going very cheaply.
And I thought, well, it's a Scottish sextant.
And, of course, this is 1880 or so.
And the emigrantships going to Australia would have certainly used that.
So I think I can bring that in.
And, of course, that fits in with this, which is another.
This is the pocket sextant, which was used by the overland explorers.
Have you not seen this more?
Have you not seen this?
But they are, and there's a telescope there.
May I ask?
Yeah.
And the vernia.
Does it have a data there?
Don't ask me how you use it, because I haven't learnt yet.
Fascinating, isn't it?
But you'll see, and here's the literature.
Yes, here you are.
That's it there.
Which is Lord of Baines.
Is that a Salkaby scale?
This was Christie Southbury.
Oh, Christie.
Yes.
That's not quite the same model, but very close.
And Baines is that extraordinary man who was the artist on the Australian exploration.
And Africa, too.
And they've got many of the originals in the Logographical Society, which is time, where, and today, yes.
Lovely.
I'm very fond of the Logographical Society, which is a live, wild organisation.
Your American geographical has gone downhill a bit.
They've moved to the Middle West, haven't they, from New York?
I'll check it out.
That's an interesting question.
Because the Royal geographical in London is on the up and up instead.
And we pack our lecture theatre every Monday night.
But there's just a fascination, a continuing fascination in Britain for
exploration.
This is an island nation.
And we send, thank goodness, we send our youngsters off to the Orinoco or somewhere or other.
You continue to do this?
Yes.
And the Rautographist Society interviews them to see what they're up to and gives them recommendations.
And if they think they're really good, they give them a small grant and a bit of a cachet that they've gone up with the dressing of the Rautographist Society, which is a good thing.
And our own daughter went on one such.
Really?
And it started her life.
But she was learning diving.
She's a botanist.
And so she got an expedition up here.
Here in the UK, basically?
Yes, to go to Brazil.
What a great place for a botanist to go.
Well, no, there's a thing called the nudibrags she was studying.
But she went to Karel Fulia here.
And it meant getting the expedition together, raising the money,
getting space on a ship for the stuff.
And then the final crunch came at the end when they were leaving to come home.
The Brazilian customs set on them for commissioning for that, this and that.
And they learned that the hard way.
Now she's become the world expert in her language, is seaweed.
And this trip to Brazil helped to make the foundation of it.
Well, has she done any monographs on this?
All the time, yes.
How do your children do?
She's still young, but she's inclusive, and she sounds like a wonderful opportunity.
I don't think there's something like this.
Good.
And there's a book on Brazil, I bet you have that for your daughter over there.
This story had that typographia.
Well, that's not her, you see.
Typographia, it's not her.
She's, as I say, she's seaweed.
And she's very good stuff.
That is fascinating, isn't it, seaweed?
Are you discovering seaweed now as cool?
Well, the point is this, that you see, in the early days, that's last century, all they could do was to send down a dredge and drag the seaweed up and then look at it or else be dependent on the seaweed that was thrown up on the shore after storms and study that.
But she is a diver.
And so she goes down and she gets her seaweed under the water
which you can see it really in its habitat.
How old is she?
What is she now?
Approaching 40 now.
She has one lovely daughter.
And what's her name?
I should know her name.
Her name is Campbell, her married name.
But how would her first name?
Chris.
She's Dr. Christine Maggs.
And she's the seaweed expert of the world.
Christine with a C or a K?
C-H.
I'm sure I've seen her.
I read the name of her.
You might have seen the name, but if you want to know anything about seaweed, and the correct word, as you know, is phypology.
From the Latin FCA, FUCA.
That's her subject.
And so she travels all over the world, giving conferences in Tokyo.
You must be exceedingly proud.
We are.
And that little girl, when she could first start to crawl, her granny looked out of the window.
And she saw this little tot crawling through the flower bed, doing this, throwing things out right, left and centre, and rushed out to find all the things she was... This is apocryphal.
All the things she was pulling out were, in fact, weeds.
Because, supposedly, she knew the difference from infancy.
I believe that one.
Then, of course, we took her to the beach, and she would crawl down into the sea.
That's amazing.
And she would start examining the shells and all the little things that lived in the rock pools and so on.
So it came to her with infants, you know, her own little infant is following the same way.
And so the granddaughters... So she was never tempted by the bookseller, by the book business.
She writes the books instead now.
And now there's another problem you have.
I don't want to go into that or not, but it's extremely difficult when you have a family business
who's going to come into the family business and you can ruin it if you get loads of children coming in all fighting as to who's going to be illegal and so on and this was the problem that my father had one son sorry two sons and his brother had one son that's cousin Brian and so
It was made very clear that there would be one son from each side would come into the family business, and not two from one, and one from the other.
And that makes for problems.
But in your study... Oh, absolutely.
Catherine Graham at the Washington Post has four children, and she made clear that only one runs the business.
And others do different things.
And she points out, look at the Washington Star, which was ruined because they had 22 family members running the business, and the business fell apart.
So that absolutely makes, I mean, we've seen it, and it seems to make perfect sense the way the Maggs brothers have done it.
And so, of course, the Maggs brothers were, in fact, grandfather and his brother.
That was Ben and Ernest.
You've read some of that, haven't you?
Of course I have, yes.
But the scene has changed totally.
There's no more quick library building by, I think, in the days of film, Texas, for instance.
And this is something that I'm interested in pursuing, so continue with that.
This is in my time.
Yeah.
You've met Colin Franklin, have you?
I have.
I visited in the Knoxville class visit.
Can I start?
We gave talks together at the Brolier Club two years ago.
And he's a great man lecturing and producing books.
Masses of books.
But you see, he's the son of the book business.
As you know, Keegan-Paul.
You say that as Keegan-Paul, right?
Yes.
And got out of that.
And clouded his own thing.
And I got a bit distressed at the time that he was becoming a bookseller.
And he was going to specialise in
fine printing, modern private presses.
And mags have just bought a fabulous collection of things like passion beans and golden cockles and so on.
And realising they've got to turn it over.
It was all very expensive and so I'm going to print it on there, I think.
And we made a deal.
We sold the whole lot to Colin Franklin.
Oh, really?
Very quickly, at a small margin.
And I think that probably made the foundation
He had to start there, didn't he?
I think so, to make a start.
And he didn't sell it all at once.
He worked it thoroughly.
And because he's, of course, a fairly well-to-do, a fairly rich family, I think.
Yeah, we visited his book barn up there in Cologne, which was quite great.
But you see, that's another thing, is that if you've gone into that one, it's extraordinary, this business of, did you know about Harry Prankley, for instance, the books out of Tumblr's Wells?
No.
He would put all his
one of the best books under the bed.
And when he died, there was a cache of the most wonderful stuff.
Harry, how do we pronounce it?
Harry Pratley.
P-R-A-T-L-E-Y.
Called Hall's Bookshop in town with Wells.
But no children to follow on, so there was an auction sale.
So why did he put the stuff down?
Did he just like it, or did he save it?
Because my father would do the same.
He said, this is far too nice, I can't sell this.
And he would take it home to some extent.
So that's how I've inherited some quite lovely books.
Not a lot, but some, but I don't do it now.
And then you get an awful clash too.
What are you to do if you're involved in a company?
Those books are the property of the company.
They're not your own.
So you haven't getting that.
Of course, and there's a perception among the clientele that
Well, he keeps the best stuff for himself.
Yes.
You don't want that to happen.
You don't want people to think that.
Well, now, Bill Fletcher, who's just died, he did take a lot of the best stuff home.
I'm sure he did.
And it's said that he's died now with a whole warehouse full of books.
This is Fletcher here in London?
Fletcher, yes.
He was Settle Court.
What was the name of the company?
H.M.
Fletcher.
Fletcher, okay.
And the son is Keith.
And so Keith is continuing the business.
So we're going to see how that develops.
But those days have gone and changed.
Why have they changed?
Books have become more expensive?
Vastly more expensive.
And my yardstick is Captain Cook.
He's my hero.
And my father's two.
And my father used to sit at auction sales, and he'd sit.
Well, you know the story of Captain Cook.
eight volumes plus the big photo atlas.
And he would see these, the whole lot being sold in good order.
For perhaps 20, 30 pounds.
Wow.
He would buy every one he could get hold on.
But the trouble is it's heavy.
It's a big stack.
And he filled the storeroom with these.
Bought them far faster than he was selling them.
But he said, one day you wait.
So what's that now?
That investment of
20, 40 pounds.
He's now worth 20,000 pounds or so.
But he must make it a good investment.
He bought them because he liked them, and he knew that that was going to be good.
But he was also a businessman, though.
He was, but I think he was a bookman more than a businessman.
And the fact that he didn't sell them, I suppose, indicates that it was not an investment.
I think it bears out your point.
Do you ever do that?
Do you ever buy books that you say, I'm taking these off?
It's difficult.
I broke my rule the other day for this man, Walter Hayes.
He needed it more than I did.
He had to have it.
Of course, I was sad to say.
Now, which item were we talking about?
That was...
The wonderful story, again, the bounty.
The bounty line, okay.
But this was the little notebook which Blyard kept in the open boat voyage across the Pacific.
You had your hands on that?
Yeah.
That passed through your hand?
Didn't I tell you that story?
No, no.
But you know, when Blyard... That should be in a museum.
That should be in the... It is.
It is.
Okay.
But when Blyard was kicked out of the Bounty... I know the story.
He navigated his way home perfectly in an open boat.
That's right.
And so the first thing he did was to ask the chaps in the boat, had somebody got a notebook?
And there was a man who'd been out surveying that morning.
So he had a partly used little pocket notebook.
So Briar took that over and proceeded to make his daily notes in that, including the notes about the scoundrels who had locked him up and put him under a wooden boat and so on.
And anyway, so this little notebook
came up for auction at Christie's.
How recent is this, sir?
Was it 20 years ago?
Something like that.
So did it come down through the Bly family?
It must have done.
It's slightly obscure how it did come through.
And so Christie's made a great job of puffing this up.
As well they should.
This is one of the greatest feats of navigation ever.
And so when this sale came up, there were at least half a dozen television cameras.
This was big hot news.
And Christie's had told that he was going to buy it.
It certainly was going to be Mr. Traylon, the great bookseller at Guildford.
He was buying it extensively for Paul Mellon.
Mr. Who again, sir?
Traylon.
C-R-A-Y-N-E.
And I suppose he's now perhaps the biggest living bookseller of that era.
Is he here?
He's in Guildford.
Charles Traylon, a very, very remarkable man, too.
Is he somebody I should talk to at some point?
You should do.
If he would see you, but don't for goodness I quote me or drop me in.
No, no, no, no, I'm just... Charles Traylon, you should certainly go to see him, because it doesn't have to be this trick either.
He won't last indefinitely, but he is the greatest in many ways.
Well, how far is Guilford from here?
No, I'm sorry.
It's 30 miles.
Well, that's easy.
Hour?
No.
Half an hour, I think it was on the really fast track.
It's Charles W. Traylon.
Charles Traylon, yes.
Okay, so why don't you go ahead and I'll write this down.
You're telling us Traylon was presumed to be the... To be the buyer.
And so all the television cameras were trained on him.
And, of course, when the hammer fell, it was for me instead.
And they all had to shift themselves.
Oh, that's funny.
Did you have a commission for that?
Of course.
From the Australian Prime Minister.
Wow.
Where it belonged, of course, for the National Library of Australia.
So then, of course, all these people stuffing microphones at me to tell them the story.
And I said, well, I can't.
No comment and all that sort of thing.
And then came the nightmare that the bid I had was in Australian dollars, and that the Australian dollar was just about to be devalued any moment.
It was tipped.
So I didn't really know how much money I got to spend.
So I just kept my fingers crossed and I bought it, and it worked right.
But anyway... What was the hammer, do you remember?
Um... Approximately.
I've got it all written down, but I haven't expected to go into this.
But it was... And then came the nightmare.
There had to be an export license, of course, for this city of Australia.
It was generally terribly important.
And they could actually cancel that very easily.
It can be refused.
The government could... But then they also have to match the price.
Exactly, that's the point.
But so the license was...
The reason was that the microfilm I had submitted was not good enough.
It had to be redone.
Because there had to be a perfect microfilm, obviously before leaving, in case it might get lost in transit.
So, I jumped onto a bicycle.
And I went as fast as I could to the greatest book buyer in the world, who's out here at Clapham, Bernard Middleton, whose book is just out.
There's a super book too, The Life of Fern Milton.
And the problem was the gutter.
Christie's had rebound the book, and it was like that.
And you couldn't open it to get the microfilm down into the gutter.
And the point was that it was important, because in there would lie writings.
right into the gutter, because when he had it, it was quite loose.
It's a terrible job of binding, isn't it?
And so Bernard cut it open, and we got the microfilm done perfectly.
And then he re-stitched it, and nobody would know that anything had happened.
So it went to Australia, and then years later they published a facsimile of it.
Beautiful facsimile.
And to my amazement, I read this facsimile, and there was a blank on the facsimile pages down in the middle, in the gutter.
And they said, well, sorry about this, but in the opinion of the chief conservator of the National Council of Australia, he would be inadvisable to force it open to microfilm the text in the centre.
Which you had already done.
Which I'd done.
They never asked me.
So I did scolding without that.
And then, before it left the country, I got an invitation to the television programme on it.
There's a wonderful series runs here called New Peter, which you've never heard of, for children.
And the BBC producer thought this bounty story would be fun for the children.
And so he sent to me, and I got the permission from the Australian Prime Minister to take a little manuscript to the studio,
and also the Afro-Maritime Museum were allowed to go with the bounty chronometer.
And that was the first time those pieces had been together in one place since the beginning.
You must feel a great, you're reuniting things that belong together.
Exactly.
You know, it's like rewriting the Caxton manuscript of the Peeps Library.
Yes.
And so I had the enormous thrill the other day was to put on a, what I might call a man's lunch, for Walter Hayes, let's say, is the big chap, the Ford Motor Company, retired, and the new curator of horology in the International Maritime Museum, who's a younger man.
And we had a wonderful lunch talking about the bounty and the chronometer.
It's a thing, if you haven't got time on this trip, you have to go down to Greenwich and see that.
We should lay that on a future trip.
Oh, I'm a former naval officer myself, so I have a great... Of what sort?
U.S.
Navy.
What?
I was just a lieutenant, that's all.
On an aircraft carrier.
I was a seaman on an aircraft carrier.
Oh, you were?
USS Pibus.
USS?
Yes, because she was one of those lease-lengths.
Uh-huh, okay.
And she was baby flat-top.
if you know what they were.
I'm quite a historian of aircraft carriers.
Built in Tacoma.
One of those ones that was a converted, well originally going to be a merchant ship.
A terrible thing with one propeller.
How could a large aircraft, how could you get... Well she was a tiny thing.
And she had a wooden flat deck.
And she was just a floating petrol tank, really.
I'm laughing.
I was on the Ariskany, which was...
an Essex-class carrier, which has now been in Mothball.
I'm not even in Mothballs.
I'm scrapped, long seats.
We were talking about the changes.
I had started, we were talking about World War II, when you were talking about the incendiary bombs.
Yes.
And I wonder if you could comment briefly on
You know, bookselling in the immediate aftermath of World War II, and so many books really did make their way to North America, where people came over here.
And you mentioned also the emigre booksellers that Barney Rosenthal was written about.
They were very instrumental in this, too, weren't they?
Could you just comment on that at all, about the emigre, the migration of books, you know, to North America, and then perhaps, you know?
But the books were about imperfusion, then, because all those country house libraries
had got magnificent collections of books and some of them had been badly war damaged and the particular one one thinks of of course is right here in London Holland House Holland House which was hit by bombs and badly damaged and they worked away as fast as they could and they got the books out
Eventually those books were sold at auction in London.
Mountains of books, and the most wonderful books you could ever imagine.
And my father would fill his car for these auction sales.
And he said, I know I don't read it at the moment, but books are going to be scarce one day.
And I was forever building new bookshelves here in the basement, you've seen them.
You built that?
Yeah, and I was stacking the books in double rows.
books everywhere.
And they were good books.
I mean, books like Piranesi, for instance.
They were quite big things.
Things you don't see at all now.
And I'd say to my father, for goodness sakes, stop buying any more books.
And it was the famous saw when he went to, this was Hodgson's.
Hodgson?
Hodgson, H-O-D-G-S-O-N.
The same one then in the city of London, which is now absorbed by salaries and lost
But they were the premier... But they were the only book selling in London.
There was exclusively books.
Sotheby's then were not important in books at all.
They were selling paintings, furniture and so on.
And so my father went to one of these sales, a big sale at Hodgson's.
The sale was always to start Thursdays and Fridays at one o'clock lunchtime.
One o'clock came.
and the area of silence had gone off.
So this is during the war?
During the war, yes.
And there was nobody there.
So the auctioneer, Mr. Hodgson, said, well, one o'clock, so we start as usual.
And the only people there were my father and the auctioneer.
Oh, come on.
And so they bought all turnip blocks, I think.
My father had had a lecture before he went on his seatbelt.
to buy anything, where it's skinned.
And here my father had bought literally half the sale, because he had to.
So he got back here.
This was Uncle Ernest's office.
This was Ernest's office.
There was a bit of a time.
And your dad's name was?
Frank.
And so my father got back here with the auction tabloid.
He opened the door here of Ernest's office, his uncle's office, and he threw the cataloguing and ran.
But here he had done what he was not to do, and he bought half the auction sale.
He couldn't be sacked, obviously, because he was... He was an egg.
He was family.
But... And of course, he was a book collector, which Ernest was not.
And Frank could see the value of these things, and Ernest couldn't.
Although Ernest could see, he portrayed as an accountant, I think.
He could see the financial sector.
The firm had no money at all.
Nobody had any money.
I think Frank had bought all these books that were just going to be stacked up in the basement.
Thank goodness you do.
You may still have some of these.
We certainly have some of them, still, yes.
We don't now, but we certainly have some.
And these were consigned by various
Well, in this particular case, it was the Bond Library, you see.
So this was the Bond Library?
This was Lord Holland, Holland House.
I could show you some of them, I think, still.
And they were wonderful books.
Did he ever get recognition for doing the race game?
Signed or something?
Didn't from his uncle, anyway.
Not at all.
From me.
Do you remember this well?
Do you personally remember this well when this happened?
Well, that was before my time, of course.
But it was before you were in the company.
I didn't start until 47.
But, I mean, you must have remembered, there must have been talk at home about, oh, God, I can't believe what I just did today.
He never talked a lot.
My mother wasn't in on it, and then remember that it was very difficult then because they lived 15 miles out of London, and he was doing that journey to and fro on his bicycle every day.
Wow.
Public transport was very difficult.
and irregular.
So he never really talked about anything much at all.
Do you recall generally what year this might have been during the war?
I'll look it up.
Because of the sale.
And by the way, look how grateful one is to Henry Stevens and for auction records, where they list all those auction sales
in the preamble of every volume.
Do you remember what happened to the Hawks and Records?
Correct.
That there had been a long agreement that if ever the Hawks and Records had to be sold, our Antigrable Service Association would have the first chance to buy it because they said it was the Bible of the book trade and it's got to be retained in the trade.
And they made a committee and they put onto the committee
Do you remember the name of Dawson's?
That's Dawson's of London.
No, Dawson's of London.
Yes, and a man called Bert Marley, long since then.
And he was simultaneously on the committee for the association to buy book or books from the cause.
And at the same time, he was representing his firm, Dawson's, to buy it for them.
And so he was expelled from the association because it was bought by Dawson's.
And it went down the drain almost at once.
And thank goodness it's all now been saved at the American book crisis with Dan and Kathy Lieb.
That is the most wonderful thing now.
The CD1.
I'm going to have to get that, by the way.
Get the CD1.
I hope to write a review of that, actually.
And the extraordinary thing is that that is edited.
We're convinced of it.
They don't just rely on the auction catalogue.
If there's something that looks a bit odd,
when they're editing that, they'll check up.
And there's additional information in there that isn't immediately obvious.
It's a very remarkable publication.
Well, that is really where the computer is superior to the printed book, don't you think?
And another one, of course, is the Dictionary National Biography, which is vastly superior to the printed one.
And to demonstrate that, Aiyong San Ednaz, who's the computer freak here,
demonstrated to me the new CD-ROM of the Dictionary Natural Biography, and he turned up, keyed in there, John Maggs, and Ushkane instantly did the contribution that I made to that.
It is amazing, isn't it, to see that happen?
It's extraordinary.
The OED is, of course.
Exactly, that's another one.
That's another one.
We're all going to stop, I don't know, but...
Well, you think with all this talk about computers replacing books, do you have any thoughts on that?
Does this concern you?
I get worried about it, because some of, and by the way, my definition of a youngster here is anybody younger than I am.
That's my definition, too.
But if I ask them about such and such a book, and some of them just reach over to the desk, and they do this, and they look wisely at the screen, and say, well, I can't see anything here.
I say, no, get me the book, I know we've got one.
You see, they're dependent on that screen.
That's the trouble.
We are computerising the stock here progressively, but we're only starting from now.
And so the new stock coming in goes on that computer.
But the stuff that I rely on, the old stuff, isn't on it, and probably never will be.
It would take far too long to go backwards.
I think they are.
You may be able to scan it at some point.
Oh, it could do.
We have a scanner here.
But is that bookseller?
Do you see the emerging generations of booksellers?
Are they the scholars?
People who really understand books and can do detective work?
I rather doubt it.
But aren't we lucky here?
We've got John Collins working here.
If you know his book, The Two Forgers.
Which is excellent.
It's totally different.
And you saw, didn't you, that the trade set up a degree course for booksellers.
No, I didn't know.
University of London.
Oh, I didn't know that.
Where you were going to get a degree in bookselling.
That's very interesting.
And this ran for the first year.
And the first ones graduated.
University of London.
And now the money's run out.
And that's come to the end of the month.
It's an abeyance.
Who was the director over there?
Do you know who was headed up that department?
Well, it was Antigran Bookshare Association who was running it.
But at the University of London?
I couldn't tell you.
I didn't remember.
Oh, it's at the University of London.
I'm sorry.
Yes.
And so we had them in here as part of their degree course to see how Mags' bookshop worked.
I did my best to try to do something with you, but I would say, you can't learn this as a university course.
You've got to do it the hard way.
And ideally, you should really start at the bottom.
And the man we've just hired, and he's brilliant, had been working as a porter in one of the London auction rooms.
And the porter is a very, very important person.
If you know the story of Jock and Frank and Sotheby's, the two saline porters.
Gerald, I don't know that.
Jock and Frank.
And you know, I would watch big men, like dental surgeons, rushing them there into that saline for their viewing in a hurry.
And they'd say, I'm a collector, I want to see that look you've got on the care of the teeth.
And Jock and Frank didn't say, what's the lot number?
They said, just as half a second, and they reached it off the shelf.
Because they'd, if you know the expression, they'd put up that saline.
They got them out of the boxes, and they put them in order on the shelves, and they looked at them.
And they knew the books as a result.
That's a different tradition.
You don't find people like that.
And that was two people, Jacques and Frank?
Jacques and Frank, yes, with two bookworm porters.
I'm interested in the kind of collector you see today.
Are there any collectors in the grand tradition?
I guess there are.
You still see this.
They keep quiet.
I'm seeing fewer and fewer of them myself now.
I'm more in the back room now.
I rely on my screen there to see them coming in.
My job is to rush out there and shake them by the hand.
The terrible thing is they will then say, you remember those days when we used to buy all this sort of stuff for nothing?
But they're real good to you now.
What you've got to have is the big spenders.
Like the man out in Chile.
He was a very good collector.
Jack called Edwards.
And what does he collect, basically?
Just great books?
Anything he likes.
Edwards is his name?
Edwards, yes, which could be Bird Books, for instance.
He's very well known.
Is Jerry Carla's first name?
He's Augustine.
And his father, or his grandfather, did a book about Chile.
Edwards.
Now, is that English?
English, yes.
In Chile?
In Chile, yes.
But as you know, Britain, England ran Chile.
If you know the story of Higgy.
Did you know that England ran Chile?
I didn't know that.
We ran all of South America.
You ran all of the... Yes.
Most of the... And the man who was behind it all was the man who used to live in this house, was Prime Minister Canning.
Did you know that?
Yes.
Ed mentioned that Canning lived here.
This building has a provenance to the 1740s, I think.
Exactly.
And he was Prime Minister and Foreign Secretary.
Oh.
And they lived in this house for only a short time, like 18 months.
And it was a pathetic story, which was supposed to be true, that that little boy got ill.
And mother had no confidence in the doctor here on the block.
And so she moved the family out somewhere else, and they sold this house.
So once again, it went into that we'd claimed
allegiance to George Canning.
Well, when did the ghost purportedly move in?
After Canning?
Or before that, I think.
The ghost story is so much of it is fiction.
I've done so many television programs on that, I think they've all mixed up, but I invent them as I go along.
I had to do a ghost program for British Airways, which was very funny.
But they show a movie
as they're about to be landing in London from a long-haul flight to get people adjusted to life in London.
And they did one section on haunted London.
And so they had a piece from me.
And one of our customers was sitting dozing in his seat.
He suddenly saw Mags' bookstore coming up on the screen.
He realised he hadn't been in for quite some time.
He came rushing straight in the sense that he landed.
And he spent a lot of money.
So that was worthwhile.
a great story.
Just, if you have a few minutes, tell us when you feel that you have to break this up.
No, I'm alright, because I'm a pensioner now.
And do you know how I came to be, to have a pension?
Did they tell you that story?
No, no.
Because you know the name Malthus, on population.
Of course, yeah.
Malthusian name has been an adjective.
Well, we had a scout who would
give us news from what was happening in the country.
And one day he rang up from a phone box in the Isle of Wight that he'd been to a country sale, a viewing, and there was a shoebox full of manuscripts, letters.
And he started looking through this, and it was autograph letters of Malthus.
Wow.
And so he got on to Robert Harding here,
goodness Robert Harding took the call, and Robert, thank goodness, just said to him, get it, hold it, buy it, regardless really, until he got it very, very reasonably, and got it home, sure enough, it was the last very clutch of Malthus, of rough letters, not in captivity.
That made so much money that that funded my pension.
I love that one.
It was worthwhile.
Do you still have scouts working the country?
They are a dying commodity.
Because that's a real specialized skill too, isn't it?
And there were several sorts of them.
But some of them would buy for their own stock.
And some of them would run and take the thing.
to somewhere else where they knew they could sell it.
The best of them were men of complete trust.
And you would let this chap have one of your lovely things, and he'd say, I think I can sell that for you.
And a month later, he'd either bring it back or come back with a check.
But they'd go on.
This one man remains very actively a standard Paul Montagnon.
He's a scout?
He's a scout.
Is he based here in London?
He's just out of London.
His name?
Montagnana.
M-O-N?
M-O-N-T-A-N-A-N-A.
T-A-N-A.
Montagnana.
Is he listed?
Is he somebody?
I'd love to talk to a book scout.
There's a great tradition of book scouting.
There is.
And I say he's one of the vast.
And this new book is going to discuss book culture and dying skills and emerging skills.
I'd love to talk to him, folks, though.
I think we could get you his address.
And I'll write him.
You know, I doubt if we can put it together this trip.
This is a brief trip.
We're coming back.
I've got another portrait of him here on my desk somewhere.
Of Mortignana?
Yes.
There's a portrait of him.
Because I snapped him when he was here.
Oh, I see.
How old is he?
About approximately.
70-something, or if not, 80.
Oh, doesn't he sound great?
And he still travels with his box of books.
Oh, I'd love to do an interview with him.
But you're a bit late.
He's all right.
But the other man, of course, was Howlett.
And he was utterly wonderful.
H-O-W-L-E-T.
Known him as Happy Howlett.
Happy Howlett.
And he would come in always with a cardboard box tied up with string.
No packing.
One day he came in, it was very wet.
And I offered him a new cardboard box.
He was mentally offended.
This was, I was, the height of rudeness.
It meant that I didn't think much of his cardboard box.
And he wouldn't come in again for months.
Oh, happy cowboy.
But he came back eventually.
And what kinds of things would he bring in?
It was just what you said you wanted, really, what you said you were looking for.
Oh, so you would give him your want list, so to speak.
Well, an idea of the things you wanted.
And he'd rather find them.
Yes.
And where do you suppose he found them?
He would go all around Guilford, perhaps, around other shops around the country.
We didn't travel enough.
That was it, that they were getting things somewhere where they were not wanted, and moving them somewhere where they were wanted.
And there was a markup in between.
that they could live on.
Were they largely buying from other booksellers, or did they get into private homes, do you think?
Mostly not.
No, it was other booksellers in the way.
Because private homes can be difficult, because that's the problem of what you're going to pay.
And that's another thing now is the idea.
And this is absolutely out of control now.
Lots of colleges.
You did, haven't you?
Our Library of Congress has gone through something.
The Ptolemy's just gone missing.
Oh, I didn't know that.
Yes, the Bell and Jerry Ptolemy.
Oh, my God.
They talk of a value of 30,000 pounds.
It was Christchurch, Oxford.
The stock was being taken into Solvice.
And they never thought to investigate.
That's disturbing.
It's very, very serious.
The Solvice has had a few problems like that recently when they've been able to come in.
Maybe they should have just looked at it a little more vigilantly.
But that happens to all of us.
It does.
In fact, it's the bookseller's nightmare, isn't it?
You get hit on both sides.
You get hit for buying it, and then when you sell it, you lose both ways.
And there was the worst in my time was the American intellectual, American Negro, probably Philadelphia.
And he would come in.
Very, very intelligent, well-dressed, refined person.
And he'd come in with lovely books and he had the story that his father would be a great book collector.
And if only we'd sat down and thought, well, no, this man's father would have been going into slavery.
You'd think, how did he have an old family library?
It just doesn't make sense at all.
And anyway, it all finally came out, and he went to Ben Weinrib, who's still living, and he had the woodblock, the Buick woodblock, of the Chirin and Bull.
And Weinrib said, yes, I'd love to buy that, but I must have it in for a few days to think about it.
And instantly, of course, he ran a new parcel, who a Buick came from.
And they went to look up their shelf, and they were missing.
And that was it.
So the man was arrested.
When he came back?
Yes.
This is how they do it normally.
They say, leave it for a couple of days.
And then he started to sing.
And he said, oh, I've been selling lots of stuff to Mads, too.
And so the police came rushing around here, and they wanted all the receipts for everything we bought from the man.
And one of them, I remember so well, was a set of good birds from Australia.
And it had no covers on it.
And the man said, yes, it was.
But this came from an old library in the States, and the air freight was going to be so much, it was so rough, it was obviously a breakers book, so I took the covers off.
Of course the reason was the library stamps were on the covers, and all of this stuff had come from Newcastle, well, well, well.
And the trouble was that all these provincial cities used to have book collecting organisations,
It was in the days of mechanics institutes, if you know the expression, when the common man was trying to lift himself up by his books and study.
And so they would have collections, libraries, and good books that people could study in the evenings.
That was the theory of it.
Now, they're all on hard times and they want money.
So they're either selling or having things stolen.
And this is happening every day.
Going back to World War II, when Lord Bond's library was sold out, the motivation there was money, though.
They needed the money.
Whose library?
The one that your father went and... Oh, that was Holland.
Holland.
I thought it was... Well, that was because, of course, of destruction.
Was the name Lord Bond?
I think it was the Bond Library at Holland House.
Was that what you called it?
Lord Holland.
Yes, Holland.
Holland House.
But that was because of destruction?
Yes.
I see.
And that was happening all over the place.
How about immediately after the war, though?
I mean, there were libraries that were sold to generate money, though.
Isn't that right?
There were people in very... There wasn't much money in any way.
No, it was principally, it was destruction, was the point.
I see.
And those libraries were coming up all the time.
And we would go in sometimes just one step ahead of the demolition room.
One step ahead of the demolition room.
which was also very sad.
I remember going to one of those sales in Scotland, and there'd been a great snowfall, and I had stayed a few days beforehand with my aunt, locally, and that gave me chains on our tyres, so I got to the sale, and nobody else did.
But I was so young, I didn't know what to do.
I should have bought everything inside, but I didn't.
I just bought some.
I wish I bought everything now.
Go back on it.
Can you think of anything?
You have spoken to Kenneth Newman, have you?
I haven't, no.
You know him?
Kenneth Newman, though I don't know.
The old print shop, 150, that's his name.
Oh, in New York?
Yes, in New York.
Because his father was the king of the print trade.
And he would sell
extensively, for instance, to Mr. DuPont.
And he became his trusted advisor on prints.
And Kenneth runs the business now.
And they've got their own premises on Lexington, at the bottom end of Lexington, where you hold on to your hand very tight.
But where Lexington makes that ripple that 150 Lexington build prints from.
Can you think of some other people here in London or England that we should be talking to that you'd suggest that might be helpful?
Well, of course, the one to talk to really is Reg Remington.
Have you got him on your list?
Reg?
Remington.
And Remington was Francis Edwards.
Reg Remington.
And he and I grew up together, the contemporaries.
Reg and Philip.
Yes, Philip is the son.
Reg is my contemporary, the father.
And he worked for Francis Edwards.
He's got the biggest firm in travel books.
And he's at Cecil Court.
He's retired very much now.
So if you go there, you would see Philip.
But you remember Francis Edwards and Marlon High Street in those days?
They've since been taken out of the bar.
But if they're familiar together, and Edwards are not familiar with it.
There's Barney Rosenthal's brother right here.
Yes.
Albie, I think his name is?
Yes, the greatest, well, you must see him here.
The greatest, one of the greatest book families in the world.
Can I just give him a call?
There's Barney's salvation there.
Give him a call.
I meant to give Barney a call before I left.
You get his phone number, and here it is, right here.
Can I say, now I've got you face to face, how much I enjoyed your research, you seem to have to know more.
Thank you.
We've learned a little bit more about him since then, of course.
Because that was an extraordinary story.
It's amazing.
How it involved Sir Jeffrey Keynes and Warren Howell.
And I am right, aren't I, that the Crearer Library of Chicago was at the center of that, too?
Not necessarily at the center of that.
Well, very much on it, yes.
But they were involved.
Yeah, they were involved, yeah.
But he didn't buy, Haven didn't buy any stolen books so far, as I know.
Didn't he?
Poor Haskell Norman bought the Crearer Copernicus, through Warren Howell.
That went to Haskell Norman out in California.
Exactly.
But I don't know.
Haven's Copernicus was that wonderful.
The one with the Houghton copy.
I think it was.
Was it the Houghton one?
No, it wasn't the Houghton copy.
It was the famous sale on the Horn, Paris, and Hervor.
Of course, yes.
That disaster sale.
That's correct.
Yes.
Very strange.
But Haven is still around and alive.
Is he really?
So far as I know.
So is this American Negro, but... Do you know that American Negro's name?
Can you think of it?
We didn't hear this story at all, but... He was in a printed online memory.
And he was stealing, as I say, wholesale from Newcastle.
I bet Janet, my friend in Philadelphia, would know.
Literary and philosophical society.
Really?
of Newcastle all the time, Albert Branham.
B-R-A-M-A-M.
Yes.
And wherever that, if that man is still alive, he's dangerous.
Because he was so convincing.
And I went to his trial in Newcastle.
And he got somebody like Perry Mason to defend him.
And the police prosecutor got the cheapest attorney they could find.
So he got up.
So he got off, and he stood there in the dock, wide-eyed and innocent, and of course a black man, and he mustn't really want to a black man.
And he effectively got off.
The damage that man had done was unbelievable.
Now you've got, let's say, this performance now with Oxford, which has been disastrous.
I don't know, there's a colony up there that... Well, they don't know where it's come from, but it's gone missing.
Oh, sorry, where it's gone to, but it's gone missing.
You know how the drill is done to you, that we have a hotline on the facts.
And that each of us has, I think, five names.
And as soon as we get a fact signal, we multiply it out times five.
They do the same thing on the... Exactly, so it covers the country very, very quickly.
And it has had some useful arrests.
They just had a pretty interesting arrest in Boston involving James Gilreath, you know, following the Library of Congress.
And he came in to, and this one out of me,